Israel says it has fired two senior
officers and reprimanded three others
from Monday's air strikes in Gaza that
killed seven Aid workers an inquiry
carried out by Israel's military found
that its forces made quote grave
mistakes when they attacked the world
Central Kitchen humanitarian Convoy but
the UN says the findings don't address
the underlying cause of Civilian
deaths here at Israel's ashod Port AG
shipments Bound for Gaza will soon be
accepted and further south The era's
Crossing will be reopened says
Israel it used to be a pathway for
people to cross the border until Hamas
militants used it as an entry point for
their October 7th Terror
attacks now Israel will reopen the
checkpoint
temporarily as well as the Kem Shalom
Crossing into Southern
Gaza Israel's about face comes after
pressure from its closest Ally the
US on a tense phone call President Biden
told prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu
that the US would review its support of
the war if changes weren't made a
reprimand that appears to have spurred
Israel to action pardon me did you
threaten to stop military aid to Israel
I asked them to do what they're
doing Israel's about face on Aid follows
International outrage over an air strike
earlier this week that killed seven Aid
workers in the Gaza Strip after a swift
investigation the Israeli Army fired two
officers and reprimanded three senior
commanders the inquiry found they had
attacked the aid trucks after
misidentifying the vehicles as having
Hamas gunmen inside Israel has expressed
quote deep sorrow for the incident and
made a commitment to protect Aid
workers the UN however is demanding an
independent
investigation the Israeli government has
acknowledged mistakes and announced some
disciplinary
measures but the essential problem is
not who made the mistakes it is the
military strategy and procedures in
place that allow for those mistakes to
multiply time and time again your tool
of last nearly 200 humanitarian Aid
workers have died in Gaza Strip attacks
since October 7th according to the UN
and as the war nears its six-month Mark
several Aid agents has warn that more
than half of gaza's population is on the
brink of
[Music]
famine our correspondent Rebecca ridders
in Jerusalem told us more about Israel's
inquiry into the strike that killed
seven Aid workers on
Monday the results came out just a few
hours ago here in Israel from the
military from that uh so called
independent investigation though it is
an internal investigation done by a
separate Branch within the Israeli
military and the basically identified uh
that this these strikes were carried out
in serious violation of military
protocol protocol and it says they were
carried out due to
misidentification that in fact the the
the military thought that there was a
threat they thought that somebody
thought that they saw a gunman uh on
this humanitarian Convoy that was going
uh this was earlier before the firing
actually happened it was going to this
warehouse and that they thought that
that gunman then proceeded to go with
this Convoy uh and that's of course what
why they're saying that the the Convoy
was then fired upon uh you know we as we
know from the reporting of the incident
the the the Convoy was fired upon the
first car the first um vehicle was fired
upon then the people tried the people
that were still living were tried to get
out go to the second and the third uh
and they were you know was continually
fired at so uh that is being identified
as a misidentification and in direct
violation of military procedure as
you've mentioned we've got two uh senior
military personnel have been dismissed
and uh some have been reprimanded
including the head of the Southern
command that looks after uh the military
that that is basically carrying out the
operation in Gaza uh It also says that
this is a breakdown in the chain of
command but we've been reporting on this
week week from internal uh internal
reporting that's been done here in
Israel by magazine called uh 972 or plus
972 that there in fact is a is a gross
breakdown of the chain of command in the
military and there has been throughout
this in fact that AI Machinery has been
used to identify targets and in fact
there is very little in way of chain of
command so if that is indeed confirmed
that could potentially go some way to
explaining how something like this could
happen so Israel trying to explain what
happened in the killing of those Aid
workers um we're also seeing Israel
opening up Pathways for more Aid to get
into Gaza Let's cross over to Aaron
David Miller Senior cour uh senior
fellow at the carnegi Endowment for
International Peace focusing on US
foreign policy good to have you with us
we're now seeing Israel opening up more
Pathways for Aid the Netanyahu
government seems to be responding to
pressure from Washington following
months of international press pressure
so so what changed
I think the administration's uh view of
the situation and their
willingness uh I think to make it
unmistakably clear that unless certain
policies pertaining to humanitarian
assistance were changed then the
administration although they haven't um
publicly articulated what the or else
would be uh I think the administration
um hinted that um there could be um
serious costs and consequences imposed
uh on the government of Israel and I
think uh the Prime Minister understood
that he had pushed
his
um a political campaign hoping to run
against the United States um us pressure
too far and the president who doesn't
want an open breach with the Prime
Minister uh essentially put uh netan on
probation and gave him a test that I
think should be relatively easy for the
Israelis to uh to pass months ago they
could have
improved um focusing on facilitating
humanitarian assistance as a priority
they didn't uh and as a consequence um
International pressure Rose and anger
and frustration from the United States
right so so the threat of consequences
from the US could this be a turning
point in the
war
could David Aaron David are you still
with me could this be a a turning point
here I'm here you kind of went uh went
quiet there for okay we're we're asking
if if this could be a turning point in
the war with the US putting more
pressure on netanyahu's government a
turning point in the war would mean that
uh you'd reach a an agreement between
Israel and Hamas in phases to free
hostages in exchange for Palestinian
prisoners to create at least a six week
ceasefire uh and finally to create
predictable and reliable corridors in
which to Surge humanitarian assistance
into Gaza no the Turning Point involves
both hands clapping that is to say
Israel and Hamas are going to have to
agree these are the two major combatants
these are the two parties that have
determined the tactics the strategies
the periods of escalation and
deescalation and we're now in the sixth
month of this war we often forget we
default somehow to the fact that the
International Community or the United
States somehow will figure out a way to
fix all of this and whether it's Sudan
or Ukraine or Syria or Yemen I mean the
list goes on and
on Aaron David Miller thank you so much
to external pressure Aaron David Miller
Senior fellow at the Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace thank you so
much and I'm now pleased to welcome ahud
Almer he was Israel's primee Minister
between 2006 and 2009 welcome back to
the show prime minister it's a pleasure
to have you on now International
pressure on Israel is mounting and the
Netanyahu government seems to be
responding do you think this could be a
turning point in the
war I hope so I actually hope that that
the war will be stopped at this point
now there is no purpose I don't see any
Merit in continuing the War I think
Israel to the extent that you can win
Wars like this against terrorist
organizations we won the war we have
devastated the Hamas we killed so many
thousands of the Hamas Fighters we uh
destroyed completely their uh command
positions the bankers
the many of the tunnels we have won the
war I don't see any advantage continuing
the war now it has to be stopped and to
the extent that the president and the
American leadership and the European
leadership advises the Israeli
government to do so I think they giving
a good advice do you think that prime
minister Netanyahu shares your
assessment that this war is already won
I don't know exactly what his uh
assessment uh I draw a distinction
distinction I think more many do between
his um possible assessments or the the
assessment of most of the Israeli uh
people in the uh command position and
the government and their personal needs
of the Prime Minister and I believe that
uh unfortunately not always the
decisions um that are carried out by the
Prime Minister are necessarily
compatible to the interest of the state
of Israel it seems like it's more in the
interest of the Prime Minister himself
which is
different Joe Biden also asked for an
immediate ceasefire there will be new
negotiations this weekend it was just
announced do you expect to see a
breakthrough
there I thinkk you know I'm not in a
position to be able to give an
assessment about what may happen between
prime minister and of Israel and Biden
President Biden uh I as I said I I think
that the war has to be stopped now I
don't see any Merit to Israel I'm not I
do not think about Kamas I don't think
about the Palestinians I think about my
country I don't see any marry
to continue this war now they uh every
day that it continues causes a great
damage to the state of Israel uh to the
uh image of the state of Israel to good
relations between Israel and many of the
countries which we care for without any
any a positive
outcome to the interest of the state of
Israel now uh if we kill U 20 more
terrorists that will not make any
dramatic difference in a basic balance
where we are but if a thousand more
civilians will be killed it will be
terrible for the state of Israel for the
image of the state of Israel so at this
point I think that we has to stop we
have to stop I hope that the Prime
Minister will do it I I doubt he will do
it but I hope he will do it and I hope
that his Partners in the coalition will
squeeze him and will Express their
opinion and will put will use all their
power ofation in order to bring about an
end to this war yeah we are six months
into this war Gaza has been reduced to
Rubble pretty much 33,000 Palestinians
are dead and 130 Israeli hostages remain
in Gaza do you think the government is
doing enough to free
them no I think
this uh observation is shared by first
of all the family families of the
hostages and by many thousands of
Israelis who are rioting and
demonstrating in the center squares of
Tel Aviv and Jerusalem 100,000 yesterday
both in Tel Aviv and in Jerusalem which
I think is just uh I
think good uh evident to the uh extent
that people are unhappy with the way
that the government is handling this uh
the precondition in my mind for the
return of the hostages will be an end to
the War uh I I can't see I almost can't
see that the Hamas will agree to release
the hostages they are they are doing the
most
atrocious things to the hostages
hostages are tortured are are raped or
harassed in the most terrible way but
what would you do differently than than
the Netanyahu government you've been in
a similar position um you've had to
negotiate um hostage
releases um with with Hamas what would
you do differently if you were in
netanyahu's
position well I would have done
different in 2011 when he
released and thousand more terrorist of
Hamas for one Israeli soldier there was
a tragic AK perhaps a mistake which has
exposed the
weakness uh and the personal emotional
instability of prime minister netan and
which may have triggered the greater
Violence by the Hamas and the other
terrorist
organizations now now when
134 Israelis
are held hostage by the Hamas we have to
make and to pay anything in order to
release them because they are not
soldiers they were not soldiers they
were not captured by the Hamas in the
battlefield they were taken from their
homes from the living rooms because the
Israeli government and the Israeli Army
deserted them we left them
undefended and now it is incumbent upon
us to bring them back at any cost
therefore in the past would have been I
would have dealt different than than
netan with regard to Kash and now I
would have dealt in a different way than
Netanyahu is doing yeah you've said
several times that netanyahu's days are
numbered pressure is growing now
internally and externally how much
longer do you think he can hold on to
power well I think that his days are
numbered I think that uh he will erupt I
can't tell you you know in a week in two
weeks in three weeks in a month but they
uh public rage the discontent the
bitterness the
disappointment of the majority of the of
the Israelis will erupt like a volcano
and will sweep everyone that will stand
in its way so I think that n days are
numbered the sooner he he leaves I think
the better it is for Israel that was
former Israeli Prime Minister ahud Almer
thank you so much for your
time thank you
for